# MODELLING ALCOHOL INTAKE WITH THE NATIONAL DIET AND NUTRITIONAL SURVEY FOR THE UK ADULT POPULATION

Excessive alcohol intake (AI) is an obvious driver of liver disease and it is also seen as a risk factor for other illnesses like cardiovascular disease, certain cancers and dementia. The aim of the project is to investigate which factors are associated with AI and thus may help us to predict it in the UK population. The data is taken from the National Diet and Nutrition Survey (NDNS), an ongoing rolling programme that collects data from around 1000 people per year on their food consumption and nutrient intake. Within the NDNS each individual’s food and drink intake is recorded on four consecutive days and there is also detailed information available about participants (age, gender, BMI, physical activity, household income, region etc...). The personal consumption of alcohol will be modelled in the adult population by these subject specific measurements. From a statisticalpoint of view AI is an interesting variable to model, as it is known about 20% of the UK population do not consume alcohol at all, i.e. there will be exact zeros in intake for this part of the population, whereas we can expect a continuous spread of intake values across the rest of the population. An easy way to address this issue would be to dichotomize AI (zero vs non-zero) or categorize it (eg. no alcohol, low intake, medium intake, high intake) which would allow us to use a generalized linear model framework (logistic regression, ordinal regression), but would also mean a loss of information. The alternative is to model AI as a mixture of a discrete (exact zeros) and a continuous distribution, using two-part models for the zero-inflated data. All three options will be explored and compared in this project by identifying the factors that are associated with AI.


## Usage
The datasets can be found in "ndns data" folder in .csv format, in the same structure as they are made available from the NDNS repositories for different years. The script is in two parts: "adjusting_data.R" containing the pre-processing to get the polished dataset, and "modelling_final.R" where the models are present, all done in R. "model_data.RData" contain the polished dataset (after all the pre-processing steps) ready to be used at the modelling stage.